DOC: add code of conduct (#18538)
matplotlib/matplotlib: doc/devel/conduct/CoC_reporting_manual.rst

  discussion may have broken down and provide actionable information, pointers
  and resources that can lead to positive change on these points.

* Be mindful of the needs of new members: provide them with explicit support
  and consideration.

* Individuals come from different cultural backgrounds and native languages.
  Try to identify any honest misunderstandings caused by a non-native speaker
  and help them understand the issue and what they can change to avoid causing
  offence.  Complex discussion in a foreign language can be very intimidating,
  and we want to grow our diversity also across nationalities and cultures.

*Mediation*: voluntary, informal mediation is a tool at our disposal.  In
contexts such as when two or more parties have all escalated to the point of
inappropriate behavior (something sadly common in human conflict), it may be
useful to facilitate a mediation process. This is only an example: the
Committee can consider mediation in any case, mindful that the process is meant
to be strictly voluntary and no party can be pressured to participate. If the
Committee suggests mediation, it should:

> * Find a candidate who can serve as a mediator.

Reviewer: Who is eligible to be a mediator? Are these folks from NUMFOCUS, the broader community or previously identified external folks

email discussions, recorded conference calls, summaries of voice conversations,
etc).

It is important to retain an archive of all activities of this committee to
ensure consistency in behavior and provide institutional memory for the
project.  To assist in this, the default channel of discussion for this
committee will be a private mailing list accessible to current and future
members of the committee as well as members of the Steering Council upon
justified request. If the Committee finds the need to use off-list
communications (e.g. phone calls for early/rapid response), it should in all
cases summarize these back to the list so there's a good record of the process.

The Code of Conduct Committee should aim to have a resolution agreed upon
within two weeks. In the event that a resolution can't be determined in that
time, the committee will respond to the reporter(s) with an update and
projected timeline for resolution.

.. _CoC_resolutions:

Resolutions
~~~~~~~~~~~

The committee must agree on a resolution by consensus. If the group cannot reach
consensus and deadlocks for over a week, the group will turn the matter over to

> the Steering Council for resolution.

Reviewer 2: I think we should turn over to conduct@numfocus.org (and they've said we can) 'cause of our CoC can't come to a decision I think it's probably complex enough to need a fresh pair of non-project eyes.

  elsewhere for documentation purposes.
* A request for a public or private apology, assuming the reporter agrees to
  this idea: they may at their discretion refuse further contact with the
  violator. The chair will deliver this request. The committee may, if it
  chooses, attach "strings" to this request: for example, the group may ask a
  violator to apologize in order to retain one’s membership on a mailing list.
* A "mutually agreed upon hiatus" where the committee asks the individual to
  temporarily refrain from community participation. If the individual chooses
  not to take a temporary break voluntarily, the committee may issue a
  "mandatory cooling off period".
* A permanent or temporary ban from some or all Matplotlib spaces (mailing
  lists, forums, chat rooms, etc.). The group will maintain records of all
  such bans so that they may be reviewed in the future or otherwise maintained.

Once a resolution is agreed upon, but before it is enacted, the committee will
contact the original reporter and any other affected parties and explain the
proposed resolution. The committee will ask if this resolution is acceptable,
and must note feedback for the record.

> 

Reviewer: Are folks able to appeal a resolution? If so what are the mechanisms for this?

:orphan:

.. _CoC_reporting_manual:

Matplotlib Code of Conduct - How to follow up on a report
---------------------------------------------------------

This is the manual followed by Matplotlib's Code of Conduct Committee. It's
used when we respond to an issue to make sure we're consistent and fair.

Enforcing the Code of Conduct impacts our community today and for the future.
It's an action that we do not take lightly. When reviewing enforcement
measures, the Code of Conduct Committee will keep the following values and
guidelines in mind:

* Act in a personal manner rather than impersonal.  The Committee can engage
  the parties to understand the situation, while respecting the privacy and any
  necessary confidentiality of reporters.  However, sometimes it is necessary
  to communicate with one or more individuals directly: the Committee's goal is
  to improve the health of our community rather than only produce a formal
  decision.

* Emphasize empathy for individuals rather than judging behavior, avoiding
  binary labels of "good" and "bad/evil". Overt, clear-cut aggression and

>   harassment exists and we will be address that firmly.  But many scenarios

Reviewer 3: There's an extra verb in this sentence, not sure which one of 'be' or 'address' should be changed/removed.

>   harassment exists and we will be address that firmly.  But many scenarios

Author: ```suggestion
  harassment exists and will be addressed firmly.  But many scenarios
```

  Receiving criticism over email, without personal contact, can be
  particularly painful.  This makes it especially important to keep an
  atmosphere of open-minded respect of the views of others.  It also means
  that we must be transparent in our actions, and that we will do everything
  in our power to make sure that all our members are treated fairly and with
  sympathy.

* Discrimination can be subtle and it can be unconscious. It can show itself
  as unfairness and hostility in otherwise ordinary interactions.  We know
  that this does occur, and we will take care to look out for it.  We would
  very much like to hear from you if you feel you have been treated unfairly,
  and we will use these procedures to make sure that your complaint is heard
  and addressed.

* Help increase engagement in good discussion practice: try to identify where
  discussion may have broken down and provide actionable information, pointers
  and resources that can lead to positive change on these points.

* Be mindful of the needs of new members: provide them with explicit support
  and consideration, with the aim of increasing participation from

>   underrepresented groups in particular.

Reviewer 3: I'm not so sure about the end of this sentence. While I understand the aim of this goal for _general_ governance, as part of a manual for handling reports, this _can be interpreted_ as giving a group special privileges, since none of the rest of the goals ever call out any particular groups of people.

The mediator will engage with all the parties and seek a resolution that is
satisfactory to all.  Upon completion, the mediator will provide a report
(vetted by all parties to the process) to the Committee, with recommendations
on further steps.  The Committee will then evaluate these results (whether
satisfactory resolution was achieved or not) and decide on any additional
action deemed necessary.

How the committee will respond to reports
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When the committee (or a committee member) receives a report, they will first
determine whether the report is about a clear and severe breach (as defined
below).  If so, immediate action needs to be taken in addition to the regular
report handling process.

Clear and severe breach actions
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

We know that it is painfully common for internet communication to start at or
devolve into obvious and flagrant abuse.  We will deal quickly with clear and
severe breaches like personal threats, violent, sexist or racist language.

When a member of the Code of Conduct committee becomes aware of a clear and
severe breach, they will do the following:

> * Immediately disconnect the originator from all Matplotlib communication

Reviewer 4: Do we have the technical ability to do this?

Reviewer 5: Well it looks like tools exist for Gitter, GitHub, and mailing lists. What about Discourse?

Reviewer 2: yup, can ban folks trivially & a to do is writing up the social ban policy

justified request. If the Committee finds the need to use off-list
communications (e.g. phone calls for early/rapid response), it should in all
cases summarize these back to the list so there's a good record of the process.

The Code of Conduct Committee should aim to have a resolution agreed upon
within two weeks. In the event that a resolution can't be determined in that
time, the committee will respond to the reporter(s) with an update and
projected timeline for resolution.

.. _CoC_resolutions:

Resolutions
~~~~~~~~~~~

The committee must agree on a resolution by consensus. If the group cannot reach
consensus and deadlocks for over a week, the group will turn the matter over to
the Steering Council for resolution.

Possible responses may include:

* Taking no further action

  - if it is determined no violations have occurred.
  - if the matter has been resolved publicly while the committee was
    considering responses.

* Coordinating voluntary mediation: if all involved parties agree, the
  Committee may facilitate a mediation process as detailed above.
* Remind publicly, and point out that some behavior/actions/language have been

>   judged inappropriate and why in the current context, or can but hurtful to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  judged inappropriate and why in the current context, or can be hurtful to
```
I think?

  some people, requesting the community to self-adjust.
* A private reprimand from the committee to the individual(s) involved. In this
  case, the group chair will deliver that reprimand to the individual(s) over
  email, cc'ing the group.
* A public reprimand. In this case, the committee chair will deliver that
  reprimand in the same venue that the violation occurred, within the limits of

>   practicality. E.g., the original mailing list for an email violation, but

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  practicality. For example, the original mailing list for an email violation, but
```
